.TH newlisp 1 "April 2014" "version 10.6.0" "Commandline Parameters"
.SH NAME
newlisp \- lisp like programming language
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B newlisp
[\-n] [\-x source target] [\-h | -v] [\-c | \-C | \-http] [\-t microseconds] [\-s stack] [\-m max\-mem\-megabyte] [[\-l path\-file | \-L path\-file] [\-p port\-number | \-d port\-number]] [\-w directory] [lisp\-files ...] [\-e programtext]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Invokes newLISP which first loads init.lsp if present. Then one or more options and one or more newLISP source files can be specified. The options and source files are executed in the sequence they appear. For some options is makes sense to have source files loaded first like for the \-p and \-d options. For other options like \-s and \-m it is logical to specify these before the source files to be loaded. If a \-e switch is used the programtext is evaluated and then newlisp exits otherwise evaluation continues interactively (unless an exit occurs during lisp\-file interpretation).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\-n
Suppress loading of any init.lsp or .init.lsp initialization file.
.TP
\-x source target
Link the newLISP executable with a source file to built a new target executable.
.TP
\-h
Display a short help text.
.TP
\-v
Display a version string.
.TP
\-c
Suppress the commandline prompt.
.TP
\-C
Force prompt when running newLISP in pipe I/O mode for Emacs.
.TP
\-http
only accept HTTP commands
.TP
\-s stacksize
Stack size to use when starting newLISP. When no stack size is specified the stack defaults to 1024.
.TP
\-m max\-mem\-megabyte
Limits memory to max\-cell\-mem\-megabyte megabytes for Lisp cell memory.
.TP
lisp\-files
Load and evaluate the specified lisp source files in sequence. Source files can be specified using URLs. If an (exit) is executed by one of the source files then newlisp exits and all processing ceases.
.TP
\-e programtext
Programtext is an expression enclosed in quotation marks which is evaluated and the result printed to standard out device (STDOUT). In most UNIX system shells apostrophes can also be used to delimit the expression. newLISP exits after evaluation of programtext is complete.
.TP
\-w directory
Directory is the start up directory for newLISP. Any file reference in a program will refer to this directory by default as the current directory. This can be used to define a web root directory when in server mode.
.TP
\-l \-L path\-file
Log network connections and newLISP I/O to the file in path\-file. \-l will only log network connections or commandline input or net\-eval requests. \-L will additionally log HTTP requests and newLISP output from commandline and net\-eval input.
.TP
\-p port\-number
Listen for commands on a TCP/IP socket connection. In this case standard I/O is redirected to the port specified in the \-p option. Any specified lisp\-files will be loaded the first time a connection is made, that is, before text is accepted from the port connection.
.TP
\-d port\-number
Run in demon mode. As for the \-p option, but newLISP does not exit after a closed connection and stays in memory listening for a new connection.
.TP
\-t microseconds-connection-timeout
Specifies a connection timeout when running in \-p or \-d demon mode. Server will disconnect when no further input is read after accepting a client connection.
.TP
\-6
Starts newLISP in IPv6 'Internet Protocol version 6' mode. Without this switch newLISP willl start in IPv4 mode. The protocol mode can also be switched with the built-in 'net-ipv' function during runtime. 
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Start interactive session
.B newlisp
.PP
.TP
Excute a program
.B newlisp myprog.lsp
.PP
.TP
Excute a remote program
.B newlisp http://newlisp.org/example.lsp
.PP
.TP
Add 3 and 4, 7 prints on standard output
.B newlisp
\-e "(+ 3 4)"
.PP
.TP
newLISP is started as a server (the & indicates to LINUX to run the process in the background) and can be connected to with telnet by issuing telnet localhost 1234
.B newlisp
\-p 1234 &
.PP
.TP
newLISP is started as a server for another newlisp process connecting with the net\-eval function or HTTP requests. Connection timeout is 3 seconds.
.B newlisp
\-c \-t 3000000 \-d 4711 &
.PP
.TP
newLISP is started as a server handling HTTP requests only. Connections are logged to the file /usr/home/www/log.txt
.B newlisp
\-l /usr/home/www/log.txt \-http \-d 8080 &
.PP
.TP
newLISP is started as a server handling HTTP requests and defining the startup/web root directory
.B newlisp
\-http \-d 8080 \-w /usr/home/www/httpdocs &
.TP
When accepting HTTP commands a file httpd.conf can be loaded, which will preprocess the path\-name in the HTTP request
.B newlisp
httpd.conf \-http \-d 8080 \-w /usr/home/www/httpdocs &
.PP
If the file httpd.conf contains:

(command-event (fn (s)
    (local (request)
        (if (find "?" s) ; is this a query
            (begin
                (set 'request (first (parse s "?")))
                ; discover illegal extension in queries
                (if (ends-with request ".exe") 
                    (set 'request "GET /errorpage.html")
                    (set 'request s)))
            (set 'request s))
        request)
))

then all files ending in .exe will translate the request in to a request for an error page, else the original request string is returned.
.PP
.SH EXIT STATUS
newLISP returns a zero exit status for normal termination unless an exit command specifies a code to be returned. Non zero is returned in case of abnormal exit.
.SH AUTHOR
Lutz Mueller <lutz@nuevatec.com>

http://www.newlisp.org/ \- the newLISP home page
